---
title:  Announcing Read the F'ing Classics
date:   2019-10-23 00:00:00
layout: default
categories: [""]
author: Brian Yee
---

# CHANGE THE DATE

Fluent Fiance
=============

A [Sagan unit](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Sagan#Sagan_units) is any large number at least 4
billion. This humourous and non-standard unit of measurement is derived from Sagan's catchphrase of
"billions and billions" which at the least must be 4 billion. Sagan used "billions and billions" to
help emphasize the sheer vastness of the cosmos often forgotten or unknown to the everyday human
understanding. Thus it is quite mind boggling to think that the number of estimated humans on the
Internet recently constitute a Sagan with [4.5 billion people estimated as of
2019](https://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm). Of particular interest to me is that Asia
constitutes half of online users. While North America and Europe constitute a quarter. Raised in a
household descended from Chinese and Dutch origins I am often aware of a whole world I am foreign
to when visiting my Dad who lives in regions with high proportions of Asian individuals. When I
hear him speak Mandarin it makes me wish I knew another language. Much of the audience on the web
is targeted to the Asian population which one would expect reads and speaks some sort of Asian
language. A whole world and additional sources of information I am missing out on because I don't
know another language.

My fiance had a very different language upbringing than I. Descending from Quebec origins she was
raised bilingual in French and English and then learned German in university. Since then she has
enjoyed picking up other languages including Spanish and more difficultly a bit of Finnish. Her
view of the worlds unlocked by language though is very different than mine. Working in jobs which
require her to leverage her use of language she states that most people are impressed by her
knowledge of another language but are perfectly fine to converse in English. Knowing another
language is not quite the "secret sauce" into another culture that I perceive it to be but more a
nice formality which breaks down barriers of communication between individuals of different
cultures. This has been quite evident as we sped the weekend in Montreal where at certain
restaurants with all French menus she needs to read out the items to me. Even in more English
friendly places it still feels like I am less of an inconvenience as she can communicate with the
waiters/waitresses much more easily. It feels like she is still unlocking another world to me even
though she feels that this really isn't another world at all. That is, likely having access to the
other world already makes it hard to differentiate the interfaces that exist between the two. That
is, one cannot unlock other worlds with language because they are gradually embodied and normalized
into one's existence and perspective during the long process of unlocking them.

Bytes Boyfriend
===============

Now while I cannot speak multiple languages I do have various ways of expressing my thoughts
concisely and precisely through mathematics and computer programming. These thoughts are also
sometimes better expressed in one programming language then another. Thus as alluded to earlier in
the process of learning the language, another world opens up as the interface barrier disappears.
Additionally just as some topics are more easily _expressed_ in certain languages then others some
topics are better _learned_ in a certain language. This was the case of finding [Learn Go with
Tests](https://quii.gitbook.io/learn-go-with-tests/) that really made the concept of Test Driven
Development (TDD) "click" this time for some reason or another. This is likely because prior posts
I read had "_talked the talk_" with TDD but not "_walked the walk_". Learn Go with Tests is
unapologetic in its adherence to the post length created from fully explaining TDD. Constantly
leading by example and working through a problem rather than simply providing the answer. It hit
home the passage from [Unix Way](http://wiki.c2.com/?MakeItWorkMakeItRightMakeItFast)

>Make it work, make it right, make it fast

Thus in the process of learning a new language, the "word" previously covered over from me revealed
new concepts (in particular the one noted) which in turn helped me to become a more well-rounded
developer. Before one claims that what has been stated is _obvious_ I would like to point out that
I am discussing a personal distinction between _acknowledging_ the existence of something for a
long time and _understanding_ the thing itself. I am not embarrassed to admit that it certain
concepts that "everyone" claims to know have taken longer to "click" for me. Learning takes time
and even more so practice. One should not be concerned with being able to say they know everything
but be able to back up that they have at the very least
[_grokked_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grok#In_computer_programmer_culture) a few things.

Read the F'ing Classics
=======================

If we have truly grokked a few things, truly become better versions of ourselves overtime
inevitably that should reflect in various aspects of our lives. To grok a human language, is to in
some respect grok the human culture it is used in. To grok a programming language, is to in some
respect grok the programming culture it is used in. To grok grokking is to some respect grok one's
life in the form of previous dilenations of post- and pre-grokking. The thing though is that while
the word "grokking" is usually best understood by people in programming subcultures. The most
frequent applications of it to my life are not from learning programming concepts but the
experiencing things under the umbrella of humanities: particularly philosophy.

Tying together the points addressed till now, I am happy to announce [RTFC](rtfclassics.com) which
stands for _Read the F'ing Classics_ much in the same spirit as [RTFM](). It is a simple website
that is definitely at the first stage of "_Make it work_" from the UnixWay but is still currently
of use. RTFC is a collation of lists of pieces of media, particularly literature, considered
"classic". Pieces of media that are the most likely to help us grok various aspects of philosophy,
art, music and more ambitiously our lives. At the time of this writing it is just a few JavaScript
tables embedded in HTML hanging atop an AWS instance but it gets the job done.

![Screenshot of RTFC]()

Unfortunately, it is currently English centric and likely will be for the next while. One does feel
that they are potentially missing something when not reading [German
Idealism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_idealism) in German or [
Existentialism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Existentialism) in French. Alas English translations
-- for myself at least -- have been more than enough to have some works deeply impact my life.
While I may lack the same language and humanities expertise as my aforementioned fiance, the skills
I do have in programming enable me to try and spread what I love with others who hopefully will
love it. Expect many more posts to come about the updates made to the site and how you can get the
most out of it! Until then, hop over to the site and see if any of the books, films or music piques
your interest and jump in. Don't fret over the size of book or avant-garde nature of some old films
like I was for so long. Everyone can learn something from the humanities just as everyone can learn
something from algorithmic thinking. Most of the films and books are only a library or [Project
Gutenberg](https://archive.org/details/gutenberg) search away!

Summary
=======

This post was more meandering and philosophical then most. Starting with the state of the modern
web, we discussed aspects and benefits of languages both for humans and programming for
communication. Discussing learning Go as a use case we mentioned the adage of "Make it work, make
it right, make it fast." and how grokking. My new website RTFC (Read the F'ing Classics) was
introduced as being in the first stage of "Make it work" and motivated by various pieces of media
which have helped me grok the humanities in the past and hopefully be of help to you as well.
