---
title:  ðŸ“š 2019 Readings
date:   2019-12-19 00:00:00
layout: default
categories: [""]
author: Brian Yee
---

2019 Readings
=============

There is a small part of me that direly wishes to be heard. To express myself in
a way to engage thought in others and in doing so upon hearing their thoughts
engage thoughts in myself. However, amidst the increasing polarization of
opinion I notice around myself arises the need to carefully articulate my
opinion so as to not: firstly contribute to the polarization I disagree with and
secondly to not release a thought in the world like a house-pet into the wild to
be eaten mercilessly. This really is a way of saying that I want expression of
myself to be a byproduct of _knowing_ myself and not just for the act of drawing
a crowd or having a torso lean in closer. Some children dream of being
rockstars, I dreamed of being a professor, both of those stem from a manifest
desire of the child to be _heard_ by others with the real distinction being
drawn at _how to be heard_ not the lifestyle that stems from being heard.

This question of "how to be heard" is deceptively complex. People often claim
around me that it has never been easier to be heard. Spotify allows fledgling
musicians a platform for which to put their music on. YouTube allows a platform
for which developing entertainers can quickly test what their audience is
receptive too. Instagram is a way to present your photograph and build a brand
for yourself to do photography for others. These examples conclude that from a
psuedo-statistical calculation of expected values our happiness can be
quantified as

$$
\mathbb{E}(\text{happiness}) =
  \text{probability}(\text{outcome}) \times
  \text{happiness}(\text(outcome))
$$

and it is held that from the previous probability of whatever outcome was
smaller than it is now because technology allows access to a wider audience
which _ironically_ correctly avoids a [Bayesian Fallacy]() at the cost of
overestimating the influence gained by the residual population obtained.

Humans do not exist in a vacuum despite our existence being bound to ourselves.
Our influence is not exuded so much as snowballed from original circumstances
that look in hindsight as definitive. This interpretation is not original,
similar thoughts can be derived and have been studied from rudimentary
statistical physic models known for decades. Whether or not the realm of
statistical physics is sufficiently rich to provide a toy-model of the
propagation of interactions between humans and atoms is not something I will
discuss here. The interested reader can pursue that route by studying the merits
of [econophysics]() or [sociohpysics]().

Let us digress to the main point of _how to be heard_ with a sharper distinction
between the _external_ platforms that allow one to be heard and how one
_internally_ prepares to be heard on those platforms. I have very much wanted
for a while to use this blog to discuss my thoughts from the readings I do
mainly around philosophy. However, for all the reasons I have already listed I
am very cautious about what philosophically opinionated content I would like to
put on this blog. As a first step towards articulately discussing these levels
of material I will opt for a year end reflection on what they meant to me. In
order of their structure I found the following works to be influential to my
life this year:

- [Full] The Second Sex
- [Full] Being and Time
- [Full] Logico Philosophicus Tractatus
- [Curated] Plays of Jean Paul Sartre
- [Curated] Writings of William Hazlitt
- [Abridged] Conspicuous Consumption
- [Partial] How to Read a Book
- [Partial] Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs

I will withhold my opinion on books I have only partially read leaving the keen
reader to infer from other sources whether or not they would be something they
would like to read. I will also join all materials that were curated or abridged
into one section reflecting more on the medium of short plays than the messages
of them themselves. Finally I will limit myself to an arbitrary amount of 256
words to discuss each book I _studied_ in full. I say studied to emphasize that
they were an act of critical reading and not simply reading all the words on all
the pages.

Abridged and Curated Works
--------------------------

Much of the abrdiged and curated works came out of The Penguin's Great Idea
collection. Much of these works however do not need to be purchased via Penguin
though, some of them are avaialble online such as [The Indian
Jugglers](http://www.juggling.org/papers/hazlitt/) and [On the Pleasure of
Hating](http://www.blupete.com/Literature/Essays/Hazlitt/Hating.html) both of
which are written by William Hazlitt. Some others however are less difficult to
grab a hold of as they are the abrdiged works and are perhaps better understood
by checking out their [Wikipedia
page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conspicuous_consumption) for related
concepts.

Finally not all works I read were from Penguin. The most notable of which being
the plays and works of Jean Paul Sartre. I **really** enjoyed [The
Flies](https://public.wsu.edu/~delahoyd/20th/sartre.flies.html) and was a bit
surprised at how anti-climactic I found reading [No
Exit](https://archive.org/stream/NoExit/NoExit_djvu.txt). I perhaps had imagined
it to be grander or more elucidating then should be expected but found it to
kinda just be what I expected. Perhaps... no probably, this is an example of
[Seinfeld isn't
Funny](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/SeinfeldIsUnfunny).
Nonetheless the totality of the plays together formed a more gestalt view of his
works and philosophy. All the plays together form more than the number of plays
by themselves.

Logico Philosophicus Tractatus
------------------------------

At work recently I was introduced with an indvidiual who pursed a Graduate
degree in Philosophy. When I mentioned I was currently reading the
[Tractatus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tractatus_Logico-Philosophicus) he
laughed and said I should just read
[PI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophical_Investigations). However, part
of the joy of reading Tractatus was reading something so compact and alluring
only to know that it would be totally desroyed within half a decade. So reading
the Tractatus is less about identifying a universal truth then practice in
holding reservation and not willfully falling into any text I read.

The Tractatus however was more than just a system to practice in trying to poke
holes with. It ended up being a way of understanding the limits of computing and
in particular the limits of describing everything as an abstract syntax tree.
What I found intersting was Wittgenstein's idea of "the mystical" that could not
be described by the AST. Namely the idea of simply containerizing and
quarantining all parts that do not agree with a model and assinging it to
mysticism may _feel_ attractive but just because something _feels_ pretty
doesn't mean it is right.

"Wittgenstein's Ladder" is something we should all try to climb. In someways I
feel it is mroe of a Wittgenstein's Mandala given it was erected to be
discarded, just not in the way Wittgenstein intended. If you would like an
[online interactive
copy](http://www.tractatuslogico-philosophicus.com/#node/n1-) is available and
you can read to whatever depth you'd like.

The Second Sex
--------------

Feminism is an opionated subject. Even with more formulated opinions around how
to articulate my beliefs after reading The Second Sex I am still hesitant to
discuss the subject in written text as opposed to verbal communication (see
reasons outlined in intro). What I can discuss is perhaps not the frameworks or
analysis that Simone de Beauvoir used but how it impacted my view of the world.

Firstly, I will say that with regards to my partner in life I am more empathetic
to understanding her desires may not fit into my logical framework. Calculations
I make that I believe to based on statistics are aggregated over the course of
my life and what has worked for me and not her. To fully support her I now try
to place faith in the idea that life is more multi-faceted and the _logical_
conclusion is not neccessairly the most helpful one.

Secondly, reading about the first wave of feminism and the exploitation of women
labour in factories has made me seriously question the modern exploitation of
children in the world. It is a good reminder that even though you can read
summaries of a book to extract the central theme -- the most impactful theme _to
you_ may _not_ be the central theme of the book but an insight from a clear and
articulate thought process that supports the theme. Such was the case for The
Second Sex which made me consider the materials (especially clothes) I consume,
especially for sports.

Being and Time
--------------

Save the best for last eh?

It is hard for me to discuss just how impactful this book has been to me. It is
unfortunate that Heidegger held negative views towards fellow mankind and it
casts a shadow over his philosophy of everyday life. That being said, given it
is undisputably a seminal text of modern philosophy it is very hard _not_ to now
contextualize many things in a Heideggarian framework. The two concepts that
have stuck with me the most regard _throwness_ as well as _anxiety_.

It is not possible to discuss them in length in such a small post but for me
personally I found _throwness_ to be a very similar to the frustration that in
the game of chess you have to make a move every turn. No passing is allowed just
as you never have a choice to be impartial and pass on your life even though you
may not be smart enough to read the complexity of the board and make an informed
decision. The concept of anxiety as a natural part of the human psyche that
occurs when we have placed to much of our identity in what other people tell us
we should do is also extremely interesting. In fact, it was interesting enough
that I moved houses because of it out of the suburbs and to a house further out
closer to the country with my fiance.

Conclusion
==========

I have outlined some books that I read this year and how they impacted me. For
the sake of time I did not expound on any of them to deeply *because if you are
interested you should read about them and if still intersted _read them_*! Mine
here are only to present a list of books to investigate not convince the reader
of this blog to read them. Such long books require som skin in the game and me
ranting and raving about some of them will not be enough to give any of them the
attention they deserve.
