---
title:  The Perpetual Liminality of Tarkovsky's Solaris
date:   2020-01-28 00:00:00
layout: default
categories: [""]
author: Brian Yee
---

Foreword
--------

The following article is part of an ongoing series where a random piece of media
is selected and I am to write about it. The exercise for this week is to write a
piece commenting on Andrei Tarkovsky's 1972 3 hour film Solaris. If one wants to
understand the basic premise of Solaris I encourage them to watch the [2002
George Clooney Trailer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rvm7WMbXfeY). For an
example of how the 2002 differs drastically from the 1972 version you can watch
that [1972 trailer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?reload=9&v=k46i5gXxAxg) which
gives the reader a better impression of why this is a critically accalimed artsy
renowned film. Finally, meeting somewhere in between one could watch a recut
that [mashes the 1972 version with the 2002
audio](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QR0buWkOuO8). Or just read the wikipedia
plot summaries for [1972](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(1972_film)) or
[2002 plot summary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solaris_(2002_film)).


The Definition of a Contemporary Classic
----------------------------------------

The main tragedy in watching contemporary filmsis not that any are particularly
worse than their predecessors but that none have had time to age and mature.
This process of aging into the pantheon of cinema is usually referred to
colloquially as "the test of time" succinctly summarizing why despite our
greatest wishes no modern film can be said with absolute certainty to be a
classic. Thus a neccessary but non-sufficient condition for a classic is that it
exist throughout the ages but the question remains of what a classic still
exactly is.

A classic is given by some aesthetic expression that is appreciable by all human
beings. Appreciability is distinct from enjoyability in that one does not need
to enjoy something to have it be a part of them, on the contrary many of the
classics are perceived by modern soceity as "boring" precisely because of their
applicability to our everyday lives. Various Ancient Greek myths are so embedded
in society the concept of
[Narcissim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Narcissus_(mythology)),
[Tantalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tantalus), [Trojan
attacks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trojan_War) and the [Oedipus
Complex](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oedipus) are directly named after them.
Each of the concepts of these myths pertaining love, torture, fear and beauty
discuss universally recognizable themes across humanity.

Finally, a classic is usually considered a representation of the world when it
was written. Each of the aforementioned Greek myths describe the world as it was
viewed by the Ancient Greeks. As a slight detour we can note that it is thus
much easier to select a _modern_ classic of film then a _contemporary one_.
While no sharp dileneations of history exist we take for the contemporary period
one of the sharpest delineations: the bombing of Hiroshima. Aside from the
archaeological carbon-dating implications of humans artificially altering the
number of carbon isotopes in the air the bombing of Hiroshima comes near the
beginning of the space race that undeniably would usher in a new era for
mankind.

With these reflections, we are now equipped to formulate a simple definition of
a contemporary classic:

> An aesthetic piece of artwork with a universally recognizable representation
> of the world set after the bombing of Hiroshima

We will use this defintion hereafter to limit the scope of our analysis of
Solaris around the following focus question: "Is Solaris a conetemporary
classic?". We will handle this question by considering the following structure
of questioning.

```
1. Is Solaris an aesthetic film?
2. What is the theme of Solaris?
3. Is the theme universal or contemporary?
```

The Aesthetics of Solaris
-------------------------

Aesthetics is such a notoriously complex and historically rich field of
philosophy that will not attempt a rigorous analysis of Solaris here. What I
can say rigourosly is that as I watched Solaris I found myself increasingly
drawn into the film's artistic portrayls. From the beauty of various renaissance
paintings to the lines etched on some of the scientists face the piece
pulled me into its composition even if at first I found myself somewhat bored
with the scenes of nature. The linear perspectives and technologically
minimalistic environment's served to accentuate the performers acts.
Interestingly I found that the dated and granular scenes of Solaris' "Ocean" to
be more awe-invoking after repeated exposure than high quality rendering of
modern digital effects.

What is the Theme of Solaris?
-----------------------------

Superficially Solaris can be viewed as having a theme of
[cosmicism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmicism). The _mechanics of the
story_ certainly sound like those of Comic horror that of: a mind-reading ocean
planet that haunts a crew investgating it with materializations of their past
memories. Thematically one can notice similaries with Cthulu (the posterboy of
cosmicism) a garagantuan, incomprehensible bio-mass whose mere existence sends
the minds of men whoe encounter it insane. However, cosmicism is rooted in a
deeper form of [apathy toward god](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apatheism)
there is a marked irrelevance of our opinion on whether or not God does or does
not exist in the face of what we have recevied from science an our expanded
knowledge of the cosmos.

In Solaris, while discussions on the merits of science occur the actions of the
characters still retain relevance in their choice to continue living or commit
suicide. Near the very beginning of the film the main character watches a
sucide-note video where the now deceased scientist states that he had not been
driven to mad but simply chosen to end his life. The way in which characters
continue to hold onto the choice of how to live their life surrounded by a
depressing feeling of meaninglessness from a realization caused by the power of
the planet has the markings of existential nihilism. The brilliance of the film
comes from the narrative to invoke feelings pertaining to the liminal
experiences of human life to allow viewers to symapthize with the existentialist
qualities of existence. This feat can describe the praise and status the film
has kept for half a century without being banished to the annals as so many
popular renditions of "edgy" existentialist art so often become.

The Contemporary Universality of Solaris
----------------------------------------

Having identified nihilistic existentialism as the main theme of Solaris it is
clear that given our definition as post-world war II one can hardly argue
against the contemporary nature of the work. Even more so it's inception at 1972
it seems to exist just before the post-structuralists burst onto the the scene
of continental thought generally eclipsing existential thought. That this much
is the case can be seen by simply examining the public intellectuals of the
40s-60s and 70s-90s. Furthermore, the intent of the Tarkovsky as a filmmaker and
Lem as the original books authors were totally aligned despite their arguments
over the vision of the film

> Both the Eastern European Lem and Tarkovsky were critical of what they saw as
> Western science fiction’s shallowness and wanted to invest the form with
> intellectual and emotional depth.
>
> "Solaris: Inner Space" ~ Phillip Lopate

This intention fits very much within the period of time marked by [New Wave
Sci-Fi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Wave_science_fiction) which
was focused around redefining the meaning of Sci-Fi in light of the Golden age
of the 1940s. Thus, Solaris aligns itself with two contemporary themes one of
which strikes close to the heart on what existence was thought to entail after
the end of World War II.

Final Verdict
-------------

It has been demonstrated that Solaris satisfies each accounts of what it means
to be a contemporary classic. Solaris displays an aesthetic vision from
Tarkovsky which communicates a universal theme located temporand displays themes
relevant to the zeitgest of its time. Yet history and dying reception kept alive
mainly through cult formation has suggested that Solaris will not withstand the
test of time.

There is no doubt that Solaris should achieve critical acclaim as it certainly
meets all the sufficient but non-neccessary criteria for a contemporary classic.
Solaris' failure lies in the fact that cosmicism still lies in the background of
the film. The concepts of greater sentient beings than ourselves -- whether they
be immortal deities, an omnipotent god or one of Lovecraft's "Elder Things" --
has died and contemporary humanity has been tasked with picking up and
reconstructing the pieces of a lost mythology and historical anchoring.

What Solaris did was take a piece of human thought and express it beautifully.
However, the centrality of Solaris to our human existence is lacking. Unlike
other pure and distilled representations of similar geners and themes like [The
Time Machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Time_Machine) or [The Call of
Cthulu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Call_of_Cthulhu) or
[Ikiru](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ikiru) the central narrative while close
to the heart of humanity, fails to resonate with it. However, should the course
of history steer us towards a future where large collective scale sentience is
encountered I have no doubt that Solaris would be hailed as a long-last classic.

